Background Information: 
The paper considers three factors and their contribution to labor force participation rates that will be cross-examined with political party in power: _____, ______, ______. 

Some social welfare, namely Disability Insurance, programs have been shown to lead to lower labor force participation rates, but only when coinciding with economic shifts requiring less workers (Duggan). Low-income single mothers may continue to enter the labor force in greater numbers with expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit. Employer-initiated programs allowing more flexible work arrangement may arise as firms compete to attract working mothers and older workers. Reductions in disability benefits may stem the withdrawal of low-skilled men from the labor market. (Chinhui Juhn and Simon Potter). This article discusses a persistent rise in non-participation in market work among prime-aged males in the U.S. from 1948 to 1976. For example, the rate among males aged 45-54 increased from 4.2% to 8.4%. The primary hypothesis is that labor force withdrawal has been driven by the expansion of welfare programs, particularly Social Security disability (Parsons, 1980). Simultaneous Model of Labor Supply and Divorce Risk: The paper constructs a model that explores the relationship between labor supply and the risk of divorce, suggesting that labor force participation might be influenced by marital stability (William R. Johnson, Jonathan Skinner). "The labor force participation rate of married women seems unlikely to rise much above the levels seen in the late 1990s. Future labor force growth for women depends on initiatives by the government or the private sector, a conclusion also reached by Ellwood (2001). Low-income single mothers may continue to enter the labor force in greater numbers with expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit. Employer-initiated programs allowing more flexible work arrangement may arise as firms compete to attract working mothers and older workers. Reductions in disability benefits may stem the withdrawal of low-skilled men from the labor market. Changes in benefit rules for Social Security may encourage delayed retire- ment of older workers. But even after noting the possibility of these changes, the decades of strongly rising labor force participation rates for the U.S. economy appear to have drawn to an end." (Chinhui Juhn and Simon Potter)

Problem Statement: 
This paper explores how labor force participation rates in the United States from 1920 to 2020 are influenced by political party governance at the state level. It investigates the role of political leadership in shaping social welfare programs, educational policies, and family planning initiatives. Social and political factors causing labor force participation rates to vary, as well as political governance have both been analyzed prior, however the relationship between them and the wide scope of length is less studied. 

Purpose and Objectives: 
The research question is: “How does the labor force participation rate from the 1920s until present in the United States vary with political party governance, as well as broader political and social factors, such as shifting views towards family, education policies, and social welfare programs, influence these trends?” 

Scope of the Study: Using the time period of the 1920s through 2020 means will ensure there is an adequate amount of data while also having set dates. The political parties every two years are analyzed in order to track changes in the political parties for the House of Representatives. This means the analysis will occur for years 1920, 1922, 1924, etc. And the boundaries are within the 48 states that composed the United States in 1920. 

Overview of Methodology (optional but often useful): Using a Difference-in-Differences approach, the study analyzes changes in labor force participation over two-year periods, comparing states with Republican governors (treatment group) to those with Democratic governors (control group). 

Thesis Statement: The findings suggest that Democratic leadership is associated with higher levels of social welfare spending, educational attainment programs, and policies encouraging family planning, all of which correlate with increased labor force participation.
