The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in Unemployment
Author: David Autor, M. Duggan

ABSTRACT: Between 1984 and 2001, the share of nonelderly adults receiving Social Security Disability Insurance income (DI) rose by 60 percent to 5.3 million beneficiaries. Rapid program growth despite improving aggregate health appears to be explained by reduced screening stringency, declining demand for less skilled workers, and an unforeseen increase in the earnings replacement rate. We estimate that the sum of these forces doubled the labor force exit propensity of displaced high school dropouts after 1984, lowering measured U. S. unemployment by one-half a percentage point. Steady state calculations augur a further 40 percent increase in the rate of DI receipt.

Suggests that Disability Insurance, when coinciding with a reduction in need for low skilled labor, results in a decrease in unemployment rates. 

Key Information from article pertaining to Labor Force Participation Rate: Between 1984 and 1999, the labor force participation rate of high school dropout males declined by 8.7 percentage points among those 40–54, and 7 percentage points among those 55–64. Simultaneously, the share of male high school dropouts in these age brackets receiving DI rose by 5.3 and 6.3 percentage points. Hence, despite the steep decline in male high school dropout participation, the share of male high school dropout nonparticipants receiving DI benefits in these age categories rose to slightly above 40 percent.

Changes in Labor Force Participation in the United States
Author: Chinhui Juhn and Simon Potter

ABSTRACT: The labor force participation rate in the United States increased almost continuously for two-and-a-half decades after the mid-1960s, pausing only briefly during economic downturns. The pace of growth slowed considerably during the 1990s, however, and after reaching a record high of 67.3 percent in the first quarter of 2000, participation had declined by 1.5 percentage points by 2005. This paper reviews the social and demographic trends that contributed to the movements in the labor force participation rate in the second half of the twentieth century. It also examines the manner in which developments in the 2000s reflect a break from past trends and considers implications for the future.
