Using the general topic of labor force participation rates and political party, I’ve developed the research question: “How does the labor force participation rate from the 1980s until present in the United States vary with political party governance, and how do broader political and social factors, such as shifting views towards family, education policies, and social welfare programs, influence these trends?” From my preliminary research, I determined there are significant relationships between political shifts and labor force participation that offer opportunities to analyze the why behind the relationship between the governing party and the outcome. For instance, Blau’s 2007 article suggests that the 1980s saw Reagan-era policies promoting deregulation and free-market principles, which may have encouraged more women to join the workforce. In contrast, policies in the 1990s focused on family leave and social safety nets under Democratic leadership. While other articles take approaches focused on subjects such as disability policies. Duggan’s 2003 article  discusses how Social Security Disability Insurance changed between Republican and Democrat administrations affecting the labor force participation rates. 

The Latino Health Paradox refers to the observed differences in life expectancies and health outcomes, noting that Hispanics tend to have equal or even better health outcomes compared to non-Hispanic Whites across various health measures. Using Fernandez’s 2023 article from the Journal of Economic Perspectives as a starting point I observed that there is significant research suggesting the salmon bias and the healthy immigrant effect are contributors to this phenomena. The salmon bias suggests that “Latinos engage in return migration to their country of origin and are thereby rendered ‘statistically immortal’” (Abraído-Lanza, 1999). Meanwhile the health immigrant effect suggests that Latino immigrants are a self selecting group and only the healthiest will migrate to the U.S. Taking this information on what has been already researched I developed the researched: Compared to other immigrant groups how do Latinos compare? Currently the research considers Latinos as a monolithic racial category, whereas this approach will allow for country by country comparison between Latin American immigrants and other immigrant groups. 
